# Be Ambitious and Be Cautious!

As 2022 draws to a close, we've seen a number of tournaments come and go in front of our eyes. Along with the staple tournaments such as 4DM and SOFT, many fresh ideas and ambitious projects have come to pass. Benelux 2022 shunned the razor-sharp bracket stages for a minigame-esque twist, World Cup and Holomania have pushed the limits in pooling in terms of music and charting choices, and the Combro Cup has suggested alterations in tournament format to go with the hyper-competitive gameplay we all love.

It is one thing to start off a zealous tournament with passion, but what really ensures that staffs strive to give their best week after week of (mostly free) labour, players continue to buy your idea with enthusiasm, and leave spectators craving for more following every stage? In other words, what makes a tournament truly succeed beyond simple completion?

As I lived my year with hosting o!mLN3 in mind while following up with every osu!mania tournament (and by invitation, the osu!taiko Malaysian Tournament - this is by far a collaborative project unmatched by any international bout in osu!), I found myself circling back to this question very often. While many tournaments have come to pass, many of them do not bear signs of longevity, and some even have poor player retention rates. We end up relying on the same few tournaments to fill up our programme calendars that typically leads to the same personnel assuming leadership and a long-lasting cycle of staffing torment for those who have started to grow old.

What exactly is causing this drought in successful tournaments? This is the question I had several staffing units and individuals answer over the past 3 days, and I got many enthusiastic answers. It turns out that staffing experience, communication and work ethics are among some of the most cited reasons for the success/failure of a tournament. As a 5-year staff of the osu!mania community and editor of the Media Centre, I felt the urge to be the voice of many hopes and woes, and to enable their voice on a platform that belongs to everyone. 

Now allow me to explain what staffs, players and spectators truly want out of a tournament and offer my own advice on how to achieve these to a satisfactory level.

## **Experience (and by extension, a competent staffing team)**
It should come off as no surprise that a host of a tournament and some of their managers/subordinate staff should not only have experience staffing in tournaments, but also be HEAVILY involved in the roles they assumed. Hosting a tournament is very different from simply being a player in a tournament. As a player, you only see the fun parts of it - the pools you are to compete on, the competition being commentated on by casters who make a match sound exciting, and the prizes (if you've gotten far enough to think about that). As a host, you will see that the prize money does not drop from the sky, that good casting cannot even happen if you don't have a referee, or a streamer with good setup and knowledge, that a good pool does not bubble out with pure luck, but with long planning and preparation. Even the most experienced referees and mappoolers can get overwhelmed without the provision of a good referee sheet. For mappers to help produce good maps that fit in pools, they need rounds of feedback and playtesting. These are all things that form part of the staffing ecosystem in an o!m tournament (and by extension, that for other gamemodes). Without knowing at least how some of these functions really work beforehand, do not expect to go into hosting a tournament and come out on the other side alive - this is by no means an overstatement.

This also goes for the overall experience level of the staffing team you endorse for help from. Staff members with more experience staffing in tournaments with decent reputation will be very helpful in this regard - In the event that you, as an inexperienced host, needs further explanation to how streaming, refereeing or other functions work, these veterans are the ones you can consult for some general guidelines and help. These staffs also have an obligation to pass the baton of knowledge to the next generation. This is precisely because they will be occupied with staffing a couple more tournaments, and if you're not familiar with them, chances are that your tournament is not the one they would like to focus on, and they may want to delegate more ground work to the newer staffs. That being said, this is where the passionate new-gen staffs come in. With a relatively lower level of exhaustion from staffing and a burning will to learn, these staffs will come in handy given the right advice from the right people with a decent level of engagement. In other words, your staffing team should have a few veterans for consultation/mid-level management, but also ideally introduce new faces who can likely add colour and passion to the dynamics of your staffing team.

## **Time**
This is another aspect that even the most experienced staffing teams end up struggling with - time constraints. Ultimately, osu!mania is simply an unpaid hobby for most of us, and to expect everyone to spend a significant part of their precious working/studying time on something they'll likely not receive returns on is ridiculous. It is very likely and reasonable that a single custom mapper may only be able to provide 1 map decent and suitable for the pool (if only given 8 tournament weeks to work on a chart), and that a referee may only be free to staff for 1-2 weeks of the tournament. 

If this is already not explicit enough, make sure to respect the time your staffs put in for the tournament. Make them feel appreciated for helping out at your tournament, because it is likely volunteer work (and even then, do not let money be the only reason they're sold out). Accept staffs on the understanding that they may not contribute as much as they wanted/promised to do, and always have that plan B in mind should someone leave a gap in your production, whether it is a referee who gets into an IRL emergency, or a mapper failing to deliver their commissioned map. 

Furthermore, if this is not already obvious, even the most well-planned tournaments get hiccups, and sometimes really big ones that require you to backtrack through weeks of mappooling or planning. Give yourself ample time to mess up. Now here's an example that has likely happened before: Your custom song for the Grand Finals Tiebreaker is missing, or worse still, completed 1-2 weeks before pool release, but unsuitable for charting. In any of these events, it should only make sense to settle for a Plan B, but give your team enough time to execute this Plan B. A reasonable buffer time for failure would be about a month if I had to guess, but staff responsiveness and experience plays a huge part in extending/shortening the time required for this.

All in all, give yourself time. DO NOT TRY TO RUSH TOURNAMENT PRODUCTION. It will only typically end up in a huge disarray, and inevitable delays to the tournament. Have a reasonably long timeline that managers/staffs can constantly refer to, have them understand their deadlines and stick to them, and give them (in)tangible incentives for spending their time working on your tournament.

## **Communication**
This is something that does not seem to be talked about often when it boils down to not only tournaments, but also in IRL workplaces. COMMUNICATION IS KEY. As a tournament organizer, you are obliged to observe the behaviour of your staffs and to ask them if they truly enjoy what they are doing, if they do not respond to their calls of duty. If they are enjoying it but struggling to meet deadlines for personal reasons, suggest a solution and help them feel better. This is not only for clarity sake, but also to enhance effective engagement between the organizer and the staffs, to make sure that they feel cared for.

That being said, being able to exert your influence as an executive is also equally as important. If your mappoolers/mappers need to establish difficulty scaling, or if your referees require a crash course in staffing, do not hesitate to leverage on voice calls and hold meetings. Make sure your staff members attend the meetings to establish standards, and take minutes for those who missed the meetings. These are the important points to note for your team going forward, and it is then up to the staff to keep themselves informed so they can contribute to the project.

More than often not, it is these acts of engagement that keep the staff motivated to work towards your goals, and keep them WANTING to be productive. Treat each staff you meet in this tournament like a respected co-worker, and a good friend. Do not be afraid to be the first person to open up and be down to earth. Chances are, you'll end up with a team united by the beginnings of the tournament, but bound by friendships, in the end and beyond the tournament. 

## **Management**
Do not underestimate your influences as the overall manager of the tournament. This is also closely linked to the previous points on communication and experience. While talking to your staffs, make sure to know what you are saying or doing, and to back up your decisions with reasonable arguments. If you ever feel stuck on the crossroads for what to do following an emergency, make sure to also consult other concerned managers and staffs for advice. Chances are, if you acknowledge your shortcomings/inabilities and communicate problems effectively with your teammates, they are more likely to be able to provide you with a better alternative to your problems.

Simultaneously, be a nice supervisor to work with. Make sure that your goals for the tournament are clearly communicated, and money should NOT be one of those reasons. Encourage your teams to collaborate with one another, to help each other when in need, and to provide recognition/feedback to one another. 

This is how a team (not just in the realm of staffing tournaments) grows in both technical prowess and team cohesion, and this is your exact job as a tournament host/manager. Make sure to do this right.

## **Mappooling**
It might no longer be trivial to say that the quality of a mappool forms the basis of a good tournament where players can expect to face good competition and win fairly, and staff can feel excited about watching them get played. However, the art of good mappooling is slowly being ignored by a growing playerbase, who also pays little to no attention to providing feedback. Hidden behind the facades of "Minijack World Cup", "RC8", "No SV Tournaments" jokes are a simple fact that most players no longer know how to provide constructive or serious feedback to mappools. Perhaps some of this also stems from a misconception that mappools will not change even when feedback has been given, leading to a "serious feedback = time wasted" argument that has permeated the tournament scene. 

This, more than often not, gives a signal to mappoolers that their pools should be considered as "good and not problematic". Correct me if I am incorrect, but this may give false impressions to mappoolers that mappooling is an easy task and can be achieved by simply placing maps into a pool. Truthfully, there is much more than meets the eye, including planning difficulty scaling, offsync checks, mapper permissions, rates, chart edits, playtesting, receiving feedback to improvements, and so on.

Curating a good mappool and representing the tournament, is therefore not as easy as many claim it to be. It is therefore imperative for an organizer to treat their mappools with respect, by having pooling staff who are at least responsible, leads well and communicates well. 

(On other notes, do not hyperfixate on having a custom song for your grand finals tiebreaker. That is not essential. Your mappool as a whole is essential.)

## **Innovation (done right)**
There are definitely many ways to achieve this. Through the minigame-styled Benelux 2022 format, or the BHM Hololive-centric pools, or the Combro Cup draft format (or even this media center), it is definitely possible to make your tournament get a fresh twist and feel interesting. These ideas are endless; the sky is the limit when it comes down to which ideas can be generated and executed. However, I am not here to discuss about the innovation. I am here to discuss about how feasible the innovation is.

In an osu!mania tournament, there is so much you can do given its logistical constraints - you cannot expect the tournament to work like a typical e-Sports game where every player in the team is adjusted to a single timezone, playing the game on the same stage. If you are to discuss about a drafting format for the tournament, do expect that timezone differences between players will be an inevitable issue and this can lead to lots of consequences on the gameplay aspect, including WBDs and forfeits.

This is just but one of the examples (without explicitly stating any tournament name), where your initial idea executes badly. All in all, playtest and proof your innovation to make sure the execution is effective. Make sure that your innovation does not cause more trouble than benefit to your players, and know the conditions where execution of such an innovation might fail. If you know these conditions, failproof them with rules. Otherwise, a generic tournament format might just work better than your innovation, which I would bluntly call an innovation failure.

## **Conclusion**
There are just so many more takeaways I can note down, but this is as much as I want to say without going too deep into silly lore or grandma stories. 

All in all, 2022 is coming to a close and crazy tournaments are on the rise. You're a tournament host who wants to ensure your tournament is a success, and you might be new to the whole insanity. Want to know how to ensure your tournament is a success and keep people wanting more? 

As a host, learn to manage the team well. Be compassionate and understanding. Be serious to learn about every function that happens backend. Know the veteran staff, and the potential newbies alike, and have both in your team. Failproof your ideas, and always be ready for Plan Bs. The decisions that lead up to success then come naturally, and you may then place your mark in tournament history.

Be ambitious, but also be cautious of what you do. Stay safe everyone.